In English we have many ways to talk about the past.
If you get uh any random verb like to eat, for example.
You can say I ate.
You can say I have eaten.
You can say I was eating.
You can say I used to eat.
You can say, I would eat an ice cream every week when I was a child, and they use wood to speak about the past in English.
I would go to the cinema every day when I was young.
So we have many different ways of talking about the past, but we can divide them into three.
And in Spanish they are three.
We have the I have eaten past
Which is the one that we learnt already.
I have eaten with Aber.
And then the other two pasts we can think of as a line in the past and a dot in the past.
So what would fit into the line in the past is I was eating, I used to eat, I would eat all the time when I was younger.
All of that is
ongoing it's like a line in the past but then the dot in the past is i8 finished i8 that's your dot in the past
Those are what we will consider our three different pasts, which all of the different ways of expressing the past in English fit into
And in Spanish we have these three forms.
The one we learnt already is I have eaten, for example.
First we need to manage the verb to have.
What is the verb for to have in this context?
So we have Aber and we had a neat trick to find the different versions of Aber as we know it's very irregular.
So what is I have?
Eh.
Good.
And we have?
Amos.
Good.
And what is he, she, it, you, fumel, have or has?
Ah.
Good.
And you informally?
Us.
Good.
And they have, or you guys have?
So that's our panorama of aberr.
And then we need to find etun.
So the version after.
We want to think of it in this way, the version of the verb that comes after.
rather than trying to translate eaten because the version of the verb that comes after have in English is often so different.
I have wanted, I have been.
Very different
But in Spanish for R verbs we take off R and put Ado and for R ir verbs we take off the R or Ir and we put ido.
So I have eaten
E comerido.
Sorry, comido.
Good.
You're taking off your ending and putting ido.
The only times we're adding on to the two forms is with the futures, will and wood.
E comido.
I have spoken
He hablado, good.
I have danced.
Good.
They have danced.
An bailado.
The version that comes after haber, comido, bailado, it doesn't change.
for I or for we or for they or for he or she.
Always the same.
We need to focus on aber to get the correct version of aber, and then we have the version of the verb that comes after it.
So e bailado, an bailado, hemos bailado.
We can also say more complicated things like I have been able to eat.
What is to be able?
Related to power?
Poder.
Good.
So I have been able, the version that comes after Aber, rather than translating being able, we just want poder after.
So let's do that first.
I have been able.
To eat.
Comer.
Good.
E podido comer.
I have been able to eat.
I haven't been able to eat.
No è podido comer.
Good.
So we can make more interesting structures as well like this using Aber.
We can also put a bear in wood time, which gives us the opportunity to make some useful structures.
What is that sound for wood?
Iah.
So I would have from Aber.
Aber Aberia.
Good.
The F allow.
What was to leave or to go out?
Salir.
So you can say I would have gone out.
I would have gone out.
So you've taken the the sentence as a block to translate it all together and then you've had this kind of salad situation where
Where this I is coming out in the wrong place.
You must you must take the time to divide it up.
I would have is your first bit and you stop there.
I would have.
What's that?
Aberia.
Good, then it's a very natural irregularity.
You can imagine many years of saying aberia, abriya, aberia, aberia, aberia.
It happens very naturally for that E to fall out.
Only happens with a few verbs though.
Aberia
So I would have gone out.
Abria salido.
Good.
I would have been able to go out.
Habria podido salir.
I wouldn't have been able to go out.
No habria podido salir.
Good.
So we have this Abel that we can use
for the past but then also we can make some other very useful structures out of it like would have would have been able etc
So now we're gonna focus on another past in Spanish.
We're gonna focus now on the line in the past.
So the line in the past representing
I was eating, I used to eat, I would eat all the time, that wood that we use for past.
All of those are represented by this line in the past.
Now for the pasts, for both pasts, the line and the point, again we are taking off our verb ending before we add on our endings for the past
So we have a verb like ablar, for example, an R verb, and we will take off this R and we will put ABA, Abba, to get I, He, She, It
U fumal.
So again, like in wood time, we have I jumping in with he, she, it, and you fumble.
So you have ablar, you take off the R and you put abba.
Ablaba.
So ablaba means I was speaking, I used to speak.
He was speaking, she was speaking, he used to speak, she used to speak, you were speaking, you used to speak.
All of this in a blaba
Now you can probably make the other versions.
How would you say you were speaking, speaking informally?
Aplavas.
Good.
And they or you guys were speaking?
Alaban.
A blaban.
And for the we version, the accent's going to stay in the same place on abba.
So how would you say we were speaking?
Ablabamos.
Good.
To wait is Esperar.
Esperar.
To wait or to hope.
So how would you say I was waiting?
I used to wait.
Esperaba.
Good.
I was waiting for you, speaking informally.
And we don't need the four.
No?
I was awaiting you.
Te esperaba.
What if you were speaking formally?
If you were speaking to Usted and you wanted to say, I was waiting for you.
Is it lo?
Yes.
Lo esperaba.
Or to a female it would be?
La esperaba.
Good.
So La and La, other than it and he and she can also mean you fulman.
We see those are always pairing together.
He, she, it, and you full man.
Keeping it formal, speaking to Usted.
How would you say we were waiting for you
Lo esperábamos.
Good.
Very good.
And what if you wanted to say we were waiting for you guys?
Los esperábamos.
And of course this could also mean we were waiting for them.
To try, related to intent.
Intentar.
Good.
So how would you say I was trying?
Intentava.
Good.
He was trying
Intentaba.
Good.
What was to find?
To encounter.
Encontrar.
Good.
So how would you say they were trying to find it?
They were trying to find it.
So divide up the thoughts.
They were trying the first bit.
Intentaba itten good encontrarlo.
Intentaban encontrarlo
If you wanted to say they were trying to find it for me, the most natural way of saying this in Spanish is they were trying to find me it.
They were trying to find me it.
Intentapan encontramelo.
Intentaban en contra.
Good.
They were trying to find me it
But if you wanted to emphasize they were trying to find me it, then you could say
this sentence in the way that we would probably say it in English which is they were trying to find it for me.
Then you could do that in Spanish.
You have that option.
So how would you say that?
They were trying to find it for me using the word for.
Intentaban encontrar lo para mí.
Good.
Intentaban encontrarlo para mí.
So here we are emphasizing actually me.
But mostly in Spanish we kind of avoid the use of the preposition as we've been noticing.
Intentaban encontrarmelo.